=head1 NAME

ixrun - Run a PC/IX program

=head1 SYNOPSIS

=over 4

=item B<ixrun> [-r <I<chroot>>] [-C <I<chdir>>] [--] <I<exec>> [<I<args>> ...]

=back

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<ixrun> loads and executes a program built for PC/IX in an
environment. PC/IX is a UNIX operating system for an IBM PC
and IBM PC/XT with a Intel 8088 processor.

The program emulates most system calls, including terminal handling, and
basic 8087 emulation. Consult L</"BUGS"> section for ommissions.
Accurate processor emulation is achieved with use of B<libx86emu>.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<-r>

Call L<chroot(2)> to this directory before executing the program.

This is useful to make absolute file name lookups work, but is
normally a privileged opetation.

=item B<-C>

Call L<chdir(2)> to this directory before executing the program.

Can be combined with B<-r>.

=item [--]

The optional separator that can be used e.g. if the executable
name starts with a dash.

=item <I<exec>> [<I<args>> ...]

Command and arguments. Executable is read after B<-r> and B<-C>
are processed, therefore is relative to them.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

=over

=item B<< ixrun PCIXROOT/bin/date >>

Just run a command.

=item B<< unshare -r env -i TERM=vt100 ixrun -r PCIXROOT -C /usr/guest /bin/sh >>

Run shell in a complete PC/IX environment -- change root to a PC/IX
installation and move into it, with a clean environment.

=back

=head1 BUGS

Bounds controls (e.g. in syscall parameters) are not checked.
The program doesn't run sandboxed, it can take over the emulator.
Do not run with untrusted programs!

Calls L<mount(2)>, L<umount(2)>, L<stime(2)>, L<ptrace(2)>, L<times(2)>,
L<profil(2)>, L<lockf(2)>, L<halt(2)>, L<acct(2)>, L<ustat(2)> and
L<ulimit(2)> are not implemented.

Hooking signals is not supported.

There are no emulated devices and L<ioctl(2)> only works for a
limited few terminal operations.

Non-a.out files are always run with F</bin/sh> interpreter. Shebangs
are not supported.

Environment size in modern Linux distributions consumes a lot of heap.
Consider using L<env(1)> (see L</"EXAMPLES">) to strip it down.

Environment vector is ordered differently.

The 8087 emulation is very incomplete, only sufficient to run L<cc(1)>.

The 8087 emulation relies on native float representation being
compatible with a 8087. Works on I<x86> and I<x86_64>, may not work
elsewhere.

File names are not rewritted. To use absolute paths in a PC/IX tree,
use B<-r> option.

Chrooting requires I<CAP_CHROOT>. Use L<unshare(1)> (see L</"EXAMPLES">)
to obtain it in unprivileged environment.

Probably only works on GNU/Linux. Directory emulation uses
L<memfd_create(2)> which is specific to Linux.

With L<stat(2)> and direcotry reads, the 32-bit or 64-bit host inodes
are just truncated to 16-bits (as opposed to translated), potentially
causing collisions confusing the userspace.

=head1 AUTHORS

=over

=item * Lubomir Rintel <L<lkundrak@v3.sk>>

=back

Nobody else helped me.

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

The source code repository can be obtained from
L<https://github.com/lkundrak/ixrun>. Bug fixes and feature
ehancements licensed under same conditions as ixrun are welcome
via GIT pull requests.
